COMP4900 W26 A3
Tom Fan
101 265 197

Note - exercise1.py and the attached requirements.txt was written with Python version 3.14.2 in mind. Other Python3 
versions (>3.12.x) may work, but no guarantees (due to pyqt5/matplotlib requirements).
requirements.txt includes the full set of dependencies needed to write the script.

To run the exercise1.py script, create a virtual environment with Python 3.14.x ($python3.14 or python3 -m venv <venv-name>) 
and install the dependencies from requirements.txt with pip, using the venv ($pip install -r ./requirements.txt). 

AMI scores will be displayed in a pyqt5 window as well as saved to ./outputs/exercise1-ami-scores.png

Original question (5.9, Q1):

Run various clustering algorithms (ECG, Leiden, Louvain, In-
fomap, Label Propagation, Girvan-Newman, and CNM) for
the karate club graph. For each algorithm tested, compare the par-
tition found by the algorithm with the ground-truth (two commu-
nities) by computing the AMI score.

I chose this excercise as it explores a wide array of algorithms we cover in class or the textbook on a small and well
known dataset, making ground truth comparison/AMI score fairly straightforward.

With only `default settings, I saw performance of >0.3 for all algorithms tested. With some parameter tuning:

  - Increase in ensemble size for ECG from default value improved clustering accuracy significantly. ECG would pick up
    4-5 communities on ensemble size of 16, but stabilizes to 2-3 with ensemble size of 32.
  - For the Leiden algorithm, optimizing for modularity makes more sense than CPM as our ground truth has only 2 
    communities. Similarly, a lowered resolution actually improved performance as it prevented the algorithm from
    picking up nonexistent communities.

With these adjustments, the worst performing algorithms bottom out at AMI of 0.45 (ECG, worst case observed), which is 
significantly better than random clustering performance. 

One interesting observation is that while non deterministic, label propagation often performed the best out of all algorithms.
This is not too suprising as consensus in a "simple" case like the karate graph should roughly decay to the
ground truth.

Additionally, due to its even more nondeterministic nature ECG will (on occasion) underperform compared to Louvain. I had
assumed that groupings across Louvain runs would result in stable communities or that some sort of limit would be hit and
we would see ECG converge to ground truth eventually, but there seems to be enough noise in the data that this does not
happen.

Also, I learned the naming scheme for clustering algorithms in iGraph will sometimes reflect the name of the algorithm and 
sometimes the backing principle behind the algorithm (see: Newman vs "Graph.community_edge_betweenness()"). In these
cases it is helpful to check the source code itself.